# 2022-02-28 Some Teeming from Tamsin Woolley-Barker

An extract from the OGM Gmail list:

From: Ken Homer <kenhomer@sonic.net>
Date: Sun, Feb 27, 2022 at 6:24 PM
Subject: [OGM] A little more from Teeming by Tamsin Woolley-Barker

TEEMING: HOW NATURE'S OLDEST TEAMS ADAPT AND THRIVE

Humanity weighs heavily on many of us. If we just ate less, drove less, traveled less, used less, were less -- but we bit the apple, and were cast from the garden in penance. I don't believe this kind of thinking is going to work. How can we do good things in our time on Earth if we fundamentally see ourselves as sinners apart from the rest of living things? This is self-loathing of biblical proportions -- this way lies the Unabomber[2]. Even worse, this ambivalence is embedded in our language, which means it's embedded in our hearts. When we say, "How would nature do it?" we are not including humanity. We say our children have a "nature deficit,"[3] or speak of Biophilia -- the innate human affiliation for things alive. While useful on some level, these ideas contain the implicit belief that we are apart and other. Nature is out there, and we are inside.

I don't believe we can regenerate abundance until we cast this shame away. We aren't children apart from nature, lost in a bad divorce. We're just getting on with the business of living the way people do which isn't all that different from the way ants and termites and naked mole rats do it. You may say -- *of course we are part of nature! We've just forgotten, because nature IS outside and we live in air-conditioned houses we just need to go outside!* I certainly relate. But nature isn't outside. It is us, inside and out. The termites live in air-conditioned houses too, after all.

The great biologist E. O. Wilson estimates that all the ants on earth are about equal to us in biomass, yet they aren't drowning in plastic waste or choking on the air they exhale. If they can do it, why can't we? don't see why not. Smart phones are our antennae, cities our coral reefs, skyscrapers our termite mounds.  The Pacific Garbage Patch teems with new kinds of plastic-eating microbes just as earlier bacteria and fungi once cracked the code on fallen trees. It's the universal math of life -- every individual of every species struggles to survive and reproduce, and so do we. The difference is simply that the other superorganisms build their compounding wealth on infinite things -- sunlight and carbon, diffuse specks of water and nutrients, complexity, diversity, connection, and trust. Their teams grow from the edges out, in modular, self-managed units that seek and respond to opportunity and risk on the front lines, while they leverage symbiotic partnerships to convert their collective value. By focusing on shared purpose, building with infinite stuff, and spilling the value they create out into the larger ecosystems they are part of, they feed the life that feeds them, compounding their future potential. This is no pyramid scheme-these are infinite things. The fungi have done it for over a half-billion years and are as close to immortal as liv ing things get. This is regeneration.
